Action Controller WIP (#9)
bhumi1102/rails: guides/source/action_controller_overview.md

After reading this guide, you will know how to:

* Follow the flow of a request through a controller.
* Access parameters passed to your controller.
* Use Strong Parameters and permit values.

> * Store data in the cookie and the session and use the flash.

Author: updated

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Introduction
------------

Action Controller is the C in Model View Controller
([MVC](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Model%E2%80%93view%E2%80%93controller))
pattern. After the [router](routing.html) has matched a controller to an
incoming request, the controller is responsible for processing the request and
generating the appropriate output.

For most conventional

> [RESTful](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Representational_state_transfer)

Reviewer: I think linking to Wikipedia and Mozilla is no problem.

> [RESTful](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Representational_state_transfer)

Reviewer: To clarify this a bit, I think we shouldn't link to third parties in what can be seen as advertising, for example hosting providers.

    end
  end

>   # This action receives parameters from a POST request to "/clients" URL with # form data in the request body.

Reviewer 2: Was that # meant to be there?

```suggestion
  # This action receives parameters from a POST request to "/clients" URL with  form data in the request body.
```

### Hash and Array Parameters

The `params` hash is not limited to one-dimensional keys and values. It can
contain nested arrays and hashes. To send an array of values, append an empty
pair of square brackets "[]" to the key name:

```
GET /clients?ids[]=1&ids[]=2&ids[]=3
```

NOTE: The actual URL in this example will be encoded as
"/clients?ids%5b%5d=1&ids%5b%5d=2&ids%5b%5d=3" as the "[" and "]" characters are
not allowed in URLs. Most of the time you don't have to worry about this because
the browser will encode it for you, and Rails will decode it automatically, but
if you ever find yourself having to send those requests to the server manually
you should keep this in mind.

> The value of `params[:ids]` will be the array `["1", "2", "3"]`. Note that
> parameter values are always strings; Rails does not attempt to guess or cast the
> type.

Reviewer 2: Nitpick: Maybe just 'cast' instead of 'guess' or 'cast'?

```suggestion
The value of `params[:ids]` will be the array `["1", "2", "3"]`. Note that
parameter values are always strings; Rails does not attempt to cast the
type.
```

Author: Yeah agree. Only benefit is if the reader is not familiar with the term "cast" having "guess" helps clarify. For statically typed languages, "cast" and "casting" is common, but maybe not in Ruby world.

> Your controller will receive `params[:company]` as `{ "name" => "acme", "address" => "123 Carrot Street" }`.

Reviewer 2: We used `params[:client]` in the example above but here it changes to `params[:company]` which could potentially be confusing.

Author: Hm...they are two separate subsections and examples. Nonetheless, changed both to `user` as "client" is not common and can be confused with browser client or something.

#### Configuring Wrap Parameters

> You can [configure wrap parameters](configuring.html#config-action-controller-wrap-parameters-by-default) option if you want to omit the root element in the JSON parameters. It is `true` by default.

Author: updated

```ruby
config.action_controller.wrap_parameters_by_default = true
```

With this configuration, parameters will be cloned and wrapped with a key chosen based on your controller's name.

```json
{ "name": "acme", "address": "123 Carrot Street" }
```

> Assuming that you're sending the data to `CompaniesController`, the above JSON would be wrapped within the `:company` key like this:

Reviewer 2: The example below is confusing for me because we see `name` and `address` both inside the company key but also as at that same level:

```
{ name: "acme", address: "123 Carrot Street", company: { name: "acme", address: "123 Carrot Street" } }
```

I don't think I fully understand this section on how to configure wrap parameters. Maybe it would also be good to  continue using the example from the previous section?

### Routing Parameters

Parameters specified as part of a route declaration in the `routes.rb` file are
also made available in the `params` hash.

For example, we can add a route that captures the `:status` parameter for a
client:

```ruby

> get '/clients/:status', to: 'clients#index', foo: 'bar'

Reviewer 2: [double quotes instead of single quotes.
](https://3.basecamp.com/3076981/buckets/35498807/todos/7116145100#__recording_7290149221)
```suggestion
get "/clients/:status", to: "clients#index", foo: "bar"
```

end
```

> These options will be used as a starting point when generating URLs. They can be overridden by the options passed to `url_for` calls.

Author: updated

If you define `default_url_options` in `ApplicationController`, as in the example above, these defaults will be used for all URL generation. The method can also be defined in a specific controller, in which case it only applies to URLs generated for that controller.

In a given request, the method is not actually called for every single generated URL. For performance reasons the returned hash is cached.

Strong Parameters
-----------------

With Action Controller [strong
parameters](https://api.rubyonrails.org/classes/ActionController/StrongParameters.html),
parameters cannot be used in Active Model mass assignments until they have been
explicitly permitted. This means you will need to decide which attributes to
permit for mass update and declare them in the controller. This is a security

> practice to prevent users from accidentally updating sensitive model attributes.

Author: I'll go with capitalizing.

    def person_params
      params.require(:person).permit(:name, :age)
    end
end
```

### Permitting Values

Calling [`permit`][] allows the specified key (`:id` below) for inclusion if it
appears in `params`:

```ruby
params.permit(:id)
```

For the permitted key `:id`, its value also needs to be one of these
permitted scalar values: `String`, `Symbol`, `NilClass`, `Numeric`, `TrueClass`,
`FalseClass`, `Date`, `Time`, `DateTime`, `StringIO`, `IO`,
`ActionDispatch::Http::UploadedFile`, and `Rack::Test::UploadedFile`.

If you have not called `permit` on the key, it will be filtered out. Arrays,
hashes, or any other objects are not injected by default.

To include a value in `params` that's an array of one of the permitted scalar
values, you can map the key to an empty array like this:

```ruby
params.permit(id: [])
```

To include hash values, you can map to an empty hash:

```ruby
params.permit(options: {})
```

The above `permit` call ensures that values in `options` are permitted scalars
and filters out anything else. But be careful because the above opens the door
to arbitrary input. Sometimes it is not possible or convenient to declare each

> valid key of a hash parameter or its internal structure.

Author: reworded to a warning

There is also [`permit!`][] (with an `!`) which permits an entire hash of parameters without checking values.

```ruby
params.require(:log_entry).permit!
```

The above marks the `:log_entry` parameters hash and any sub-hash of it as
permitted and does not check for permitted scalars, anything is accepted.

WARNING: Extreme care should be taken when using `permit!`, as it will allow all

> current and future model attributes to be mass-assigned.

Author: yeah that is surprising.

data. The signed cookie jar appends a cryptographic signature on the cookie
values to protect their integrity. The encrypted cookie jar encrypts the values
in addition to signing them, so that they cannot be read by the user. Refer to
the [API
documentation](https://api.rubyonrails.org/classes/ActionDispatch/Cookies.html)
for more details.

These special cookie jars use a serializer to serialize the cookie values into
strings and deserialize them into Ruby objects when read back. You can specify
which serializer to use via [`config.action_dispatch.cookies_serializer`][]. The default serializer for new applications is `:json`.

NOTE: Be aware that JSON has limited support serializing Ruby objects suck as
`Date`, `Time`, and `Symbol`. These will be serialized and deserialized into
`String`s:

```ruby
class CookiesController < ApplicationController
  def set_cookie
    cookies.encrypted[:expiration_date] = Date.tomorrow # => Thu, 20 Mar 2014
    redirect_to action: 'read_cookie'
  end

  def read_cookie
    cookies.encrypted[:expiration_date] # => "2014-03-20"
  end
end
```

If you need to store these or more complex objects, you may need to manually

> convert their values when reading them in subsequent requests.

Author: Added to the above example. Using a date and using both `signed` and `encrypted`.

If you use the cookie session store, the above applies to the `session` and
`flash` hash as well.

[`config.action_dispatch.cookies_serializer`]: configuring.html#config-action-dispatch-cookies-serializer
[`cookies`]: https://api.rubyonrails.org/classes/ActionController/Cookies.html#method-i-cookies

Session
-------

While cookies are stored client-side, session data is stored server-side (in
memory, a database, or a cache), and the duration is usually temporary and tied
to the user's session (e.g. until they close the browser). An example use case
for session is storing sensitive data like user authentication.

In a Rails application, the session is available in the controller and the view.

> ### Working With the Session

Reviewer 2: Since "with" is a [preposition](https://edgeguides.rubyonrails.org/ruby_on_rails_guides_guidelines.html#headings) here, should it be 

```suggestion
### Working with the Session
```

    end
end
```

To store something in the session, you can assign it to a key similar to adding a value to a hash. After a user is authenticated, its `id` is saved in the session to be used for subsequent requests:

```ruby
class SessionsController < ApplicationController
  def create
    if user = User.authenticate(params[:username], params[:password])
      session[:current_user_id] = user.id
      redirect_to root_url
    end
  end
end
```

To remove something from the session, delete the key/value pair. Deleting the `current_user_id` key from the session is a typical way to log the user out:

```ruby
class SessionsController < ApplicationController
  def destroy
    session.delete(:current_user_id)
    # Clear the current user as well
    @current_user = nil
    redirect_to root_url, status: :see_other
  end
end
```

It is possible to reset the entire session with [`reset_session`][]. It is recommended to use `reset_session` after logging in to avoid session fixation attacks. Please refer to the [Security Guide](https://edgeguides.rubyonrails.org/security.html#session-fixation-countermeasures) for details.

> NOTE: Sessions are lazily loaded. If you don't access sessions in your action's code, they will not be loaded. Hence, you will never need to disable sessions, just not accessing them will do the job.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
NOTE: Sessions are lazily loaded. If you don't access sessions in your action's code, they will not be loaded. Hence, you will never need to disable sessions; not accessing them will do the job.
```
or

```suggestion
NOTE: Sessions are lazily loaded. If you don't access sessions in your action's code, they will not be loaded. Hence, you will never need to disable sessions - not accessing them will do the job.
```

application is a good practice to give the user feedback that their action was
successful (or that there were errors).

In addition to `:notice`, you can also set `:alert`. These are typically styled
(using CSS) with different colors to indicate their meaning (e.g. green for
notices and orange/red for alerts).

It is also possible to assign a flash message as part of the redirection as a
parameter to `redirect_to`:

```ruby
redirect_to root_url, notice: "You have successfully logged out."
redirect_to root_url, alert: "There was an issue."
redirect_to root_url, flash: { referral_code: 1234 }
```

You can set any key in a flash (similar to sessions); you're not limited to `notice` and `alert`:

```erb
<% if flash[:just_signed_up] %>
  <p class="welcome">Welcome to our site!</p>
<% end %>
```

In the above logout example, the `destroy` action redirects to the application's
`root_url`, where the message is available to be displayed. However, it's not
displayed automatically. It's up to the next action to decide what, if anything,
it will do with what the previous action put in the flash.

#### Displaying flash messages

> If a previous action _has_ set a flash message, it's a good idea of display that to the user typically. We can accomplish this consistently by adding the HTML for displaying any flash messages in the application's default layout. Here's an example from `app/views/layouts/application.html.erb`:

Author: edited

application is a good practice to give the user feedback that their action was
successful (or that there were errors).

In addition to `:notice`, you can also set `:alert`. These are typically styled
(using CSS) with different colors to indicate their meaning (e.g. green for
notices and orange/red for alerts).

It is also possible to assign a flash message as part of the redirection as a
parameter to `redirect_to`:

```ruby
redirect_to root_url, notice: "You have successfully logged out."
redirect_to root_url, alert: "There was an issue."
redirect_to root_url, flash: { referral_code: 1234 }
```

You can set any key in a flash (similar to sessions); you're not limited to `notice` and `alert`:

```erb
<% if flash[:just_signed_up] %>
  <p class="welcome">Welcome to our site!</p>
<% end %>
```

In the above logout example, the `destroy` action redirects to the application's
`root_url`, where the message is available to be displayed. However, it's not
displayed automatically. It's up to the next action to decide what, if anything,
it will do with what the previous action put in the flash.

#### Displaying flash messages

> If a previous action _has_ set a flash message, it's a good idea of display that to the user typically. We can accomplish this consistently by adding the HTML for displaying any flash messages in the application's default layout. Here's an example from `app/views/layouts/application.html.erb`:

Author: edited

end
```

[`flash`]: https://api.rubyonrails.org/classes/ActionDispatch/Flash/RequestMethods.html#method-i-flash
[`flash.keep`]: https://api.rubyonrails.org/classes/ActionDispatch/Flash/FlashHash.html#method-i-keep
[`flash.now`]: https://api.rubyonrails.org/classes/ActionDispatch/Flash/FlashHash.html#method-i-now

### Session Storage Options

All sessions have a unique Id that represents the session object; these Ids are stored in a cookie. The actual session objects use one of the following storage mechanisms:

* [`ActionDispatch::Session::CookieStore`][] - Stores everything on the client.
* [`ActionDispatch::Session::CacheStore`][] - Stores the data in the Rails cache.
* [`ActionDispatch::Session::ActiveRecordStore`][activerecord-session_store] -
  Stores the data in a database using Active Record (requires the
  [`activerecord-session_store`][activerecord-session_store] gem)
* A custom store or a store provided by a third party gem

For most session stores, the unique Id in the cookie is used to look up session data on the server (e.g. a database table). Rails does not allow you to pass the session ID in the URL as this is less secure.

> The `CookieStore` is the default and recommended session store. It stores all session data in the cookie itself (the ID is still available to you if you need it). The cookie data is cryptographically signed to prevent tampering. It's also encrypted so anyone with access to it can't read its contents. The `CookieStore` is lightweight and does not require any configuration to use in a new application.

Author: Removed the repetition about signed and encrypted cookies. This section is about storage options so keeping it short and focused on that.

```yaml
# aws:
#   access_key_id: 123
#   secret_access_key: 345

# Used as the base secret for all MessageVerifiers in Rails, including the one protecting cookies.
secret_key_base: 492f...
```

WARNING: Changing the secret_key_base when using the `CookieStore` will invalidate all existing sessions.

[`ActionDispatch::Session::CookieStore`]: https://api.rubyonrails.org/classes/ActionDispatch/Session/CookieStore.html
[`ActionDispatch::Session::CacheStore`]: https://api.rubyonrails.org/classes/ActionDispatch/Session/CacheStore.html
[activerecord-session_store]: https://github.com/rails/activerecord-session_store

Controller Callbacks
--------------------

Controller callbacks are methods that are defined to automatically run before
and/or after a controller action. A controller callback method can be defined in
a given controller or in the `ApplicationController`. Since all controllers
inherit from `ApplicationController`, callbacks defined here will run on every
controller in your application.

### `before_action`

Callback methods registered via [`before_action`][] run _before_ a controller

> action. They may halt the request cycle. A common example use case for

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
action. They may halt the request cycle. A common use case for
```

end
```

[`flash`]: https://api.rubyonrails.org/classes/ActionDispatch/Flash/RequestMethods.html#method-i-flash
[`flash.keep`]: https://api.rubyonrails.org/classes/ActionDispatch/Flash/FlashHash.html#method-i-keep
[`flash.now`]: https://api.rubyonrails.org/classes/ActionDispatch/Flash/FlashHash.html#method-i-now

### Session Storage Options

> All sessions have a unique Id that represents the session object; these Ids are stored in a cookie. The actual session objects use one of the following storage mechanisms:

Author: Hm...I can go with session ID and make that consistent.

* [`ActionDispatch::Session::ActiveRecordStore`][activerecord-session_store] -
  Stores the data in a database using Active Record (requires the
  [`activerecord-session_store`][activerecord-session_store] gem)
* A custom store or a store provided by a third party gem

For most session stores, the unique Id in the cookie is used to look up session data on the server (e.g. a database table). Rails does not allow you to pass the session ID in the URL as this is less secure.

The `CookieStore` is the default and recommended session store. It stores all session data in the cookie itself (the ID is still available to you if you need it). The cookie data is cryptographically signed to prevent tampering. It's also encrypted so anyone with access to it can't read its contents. The `CookieStore` is lightweight and does not require any configuration to use in a new application.

The `CookieStore`` can store 4 kB of data - much less than the other storage options - but this is usually enough. Storing large amounts of data in the session is discouraged. You should especially avoid storing complex objects (such as model instances) in the session.

> You can use the `CacheStore` if your sessions don't store critical data or don't need to be around for long periods (for instance if you just use the flash for messaging). This will store sessions using the cache implementation you have configured for your application. The advantage of this is that you can use your existing cache infrastructure for storing sessions without requiring any additional setup or administration. The downside, of course, is that the sessions will be ephemeral and could disappear at any time.

Reviewer 2: I like @OughtPuts suggestion, but I've also remove "ofcourse" from the last sentence.

```suggestion
You can use the `CacheStore` if your sessions don't store critical data or don't need to be around for long periods (for instance if you just use the flash for messaging). This will store sessions using the cache implementation you have configured for your application. The advantage is that you can use your existing cache infrastructure for storing sessions without requiring any additional setup or administration. The downside is that the session storage will be temporary and they could disappear at any time.
```

logged in (to allow the user to log in) otherwise the user will never be able to
log in. You can use [`skip_before_action`][] to allow specified controller
actions to skip a given `before_action`:

```ruby
class LoginsController < ApplicationController
  skip_before_action :require_login, only: [:new, :create]
end
```

Now, the `LoginsController`'s `new` and `create` actions will work without
requiring the user to be logged in.

The `:only` option skips the callback only for the listed actions; there is also
an `:except` option which works the other way. These options can be used when
registering action callbacks too, to add callbacks which only runs for selected
actions.

NOTE: If you register the same action callback multiple times with different
options, the last action callback definition will overwrite the previous ones.

[`before_action`]: https://api.rubyonrails.org/classes/AbstractController/Callbacks/ClassMethods.html#method-i-before_action
[`skip_before_action`]: https://api.rubyonrails.org/classes/AbstractController/Callbacks/ClassMethods.html#method-i-skip_before_action

### `after_action` and `around_action`

> You can also define action callbacks to run _after_ a controller action has been executed with [`after_action`][], or to run both before and after with `around_action`][].

Author: fixed that typo, thanks!

end
```

> The above is not an ideal example. The `LoginActionCallback` method is not run in the scope of the controller but gets `controller` as an argument.

Reviewer: This comment is pretty old. I'm not sure if we can add a better example though.
Maybe replace it with the duration measurement example mentioned earlier?

Author: Updated

| `remote_ip`                               | The IP address of the client.                                                    |
| `url`                                     | The entire URL used for the request.                                             |

#### `query_parameters`, `request_parameters`, and `path_parameters`

Rails collects all of the parameters for a given request in the `params` hash,
including the ones set in the URL as query string parameters, and those sent as
the body of a `POST` request. The request object has three methods that give you
access to the various parameters.

* [`query_parameters`][] - contains parameters that were sent as part of the
  query string.
* [`request_parameters`][] - contains parameters sent as part of the post body.

>   * [`path_parameters`][] - contains parameters parsed by the router as being

Reviewer 3: Should this last one be indented?

  part of the path leading to this particular controller and action.

[`path_parameters`]: https://api.rubyonrails.org/classes/ActionDispatch/Http/Parameters.html#method-i-path_parameters
[`query_parameters`]: https://api.rubyonrails.org/classes/ActionDispatch/Request.html#method-i-query_parameters
[`request_parameters`]: https://api.rubyonrails.org/classes/ActionDispatch/Request.html#method-i-request_parameters

### The `response` Object

The response object is built up during the execution of the action from
rendering data to be sent back to the client browser. It's not usually used
directly but sometimes, in an `after_action` callback for example, it can be
useful to access the response directly. One use case is for setting custom
response headers:

```ruby
response.headers["Content-Type"] = "application/pdf"
```

The `headers` attribute is a hash which maps header names to header values.
Rails sets some headers automatically but if you need to update a header or add

> a custom headers, you can use `response.headers` as in the example above.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
a custom header, you can use `response.headers` as in the example above.
```
